So in the earlier chapter on routing,
we learned how to create routes
with dynamic parameters.
But sometimes it's helpful to
make a parameter optional.
A really good example of this is
when you're using the path name to
determine the locale.
So you might begin your routes with slash
fr for your French users, slash de for
your German users, and so on.
But you also want to
have a default locale.
So at the moment,
we're doubling things up.
We have our default page.svelte here,
and then we also have
the language-specific ones up here.
And this one here is kind of duplicative,
we wanna get rid of that.
So we can change this lang directory
here to use double brackets instead, and
that makes that parameter optional.
Just gonna hit the Rename button there and
change that to lang with double brackets.
And the app is now failing to
build because we have a conflict
between this route and this route.
In other words, it's ambiguous, SvelteKit
doesn't know which of these is supposed to
apply if you hit the '/' route.
So we're gonna just
delete this altogether.
And then finally,
we're gonna edit the page.server.js inside
the lang directory to
specify a default local.
So here's our
internationalization data here.
I'm just gonna add a fallback here for
when lang is undefined.
Sometimes you'll have a route that has
an unknown number of path segments.
And in these cases, we can use what's
called a rest parameter to match
any number of segments
from zero to whatever.
And it's named after its resemblance
to the rest parameters in JavaScript.
So let's take this
src/routes/[path] directory and
rename it to [...path].
Right, this will now match
any route whatsoever.
So we can keep clicking this and
it will still match the current route
Until eventually we reset.
And when you have a situation like this,
other more specific routes
will be tested first.
So the rest parameter is
essentially a catchall.
This is useful to have in nested
inside other directories.
For example, if you want custom 404 pages
for different parts of your app, then you
can create a catchall that has its own
error.svelte and its own data loading.
Inside the load function,
you could throw in a 404 error and
it would render that error page
instead of the fallback error page.
Now, unlike in some frameworks, you do
not need to put your rest parameters at
the end of the route,
you can have them inside.
So something like
/item/[...path]/edit,
is a totally valid route, or
/items/[...path].json
is also totally valid.
Sometimes we want to add some
matching logic to our routing.
For example, you might want a route
like colors/value to match
hex values like ff3e00 or 676779.
But you don't wanna match named colors
like colors/octarine or
any other arbitrary input
like this invalid value here.
And we can do that with
a thing called a matcher.
First, we create a new file
in a directory called params.
I'm gonna call this one hex.js.
And inside this module,
I'm gonna export a function called match.
And the job of this function is to return
true if the parameter is a successful
match, and false if it's not.
So the regular expression for
a hex code is, let's see,
we want the caret to match the start, and
then we want to have any number of 0 to 9,
a to f.
No, not any number, we want six of them,
followed by the end of the match string.
I'm gonna test the value against that.
Right, and then to use the new matcher,
we're gonna rename this [color]
directory to [color=hex].
Right, and so we can continue
navigating between the colors, but
if we now navigate to the invalid route,
it's gonna be a 404.
That does not match colors equal hex.
And so these matches, they run on
the server when you're doing routing on
the server, and
they also run in the client.
So you need to make sure that you're not
accessing any server-side information
inside your matches.
As we saw earlier in the workshop, layouts
are a way to share user interface and
data loading logic between different
routes of your application.
Or sometimes it's useful to have
layouts that don't affect the route.
For example, you might have a /app
and /account routes, and
those need to be behind authentication
while your /about route page is
open to the world.
And we can do this with
a thing called a route group,
which is a directory in parentheses.
So first thing we're gonna do, is we're
gonna rename the account directory here to
authed/account with
the authed in parentheses.
Right, and we can navigate to the account
page just as we could before,
nothing has changed.
Even though we have this
directory in the tree,
that's not reflected in
the routing structure.
We're gonna move app
into the same directory.
Again, I'm just gonna hit
that Rename button and
prefix it with authed in parentheses,
right, and these two things are now grouped,
and we can navigate to all the same
routes that we could before.
But what we can do now,
now that we have that route group is,
we can control access to those routes
by creating a layout.server.js
inside the authed directory.
So just click on that, and
then create the layout.server.js file.
And we're gonna redirect the user if we
detect that they're not logged in, and
pull the redirect helper from SvelteKit.
Then we're gonna export a load function.
And if the user doesn't
have the logged_in cookie,
Then we're gonna throw a redirect and
send them to the log in page.
But we're gonna redirect them once they do
log in back to wherever we currently are.
Right, so now if we try to visit
the account page or the app page,
it's gonna send us to
the log in page instead.
The log in route has
a form action which sets
the logged_in cookie when
we press the Login button.
I'm gonna hit that.
And now I go to the account page.
We can add some UI to these two routes
that's distinct from the UIs on the rest
of the app by adding a layout.svelte
component inside the authed directory.
So hit that button there and
create layout.svelte.
Then inside here,
we're gonna create a form,
method = POST, action = logout.
And create that Logout button,
followed by the slot so
that we can put the page content in.
So now if I'm on the account page or
the app page, I can logout, and
I'll get kicked back out to the homepage
where I don't need to be authenticated.
So that's how you create a layout
group without affecting the route.
Sometimes we need to
do the opposite thing,
sometimes we need to break out of layouts.
Ordinarily, every page inherits
every layer above it so
that if we have a page
like abc/page.svelte,
then it will inherit all of these layouts.
The route layout, the a layout,
the b layout, and the c layout.
And you can see that in this exercise if
we navigate between these different pages,
each of these layouts is
getting applied in turn.
And sometimes it's useful to be able to
break out of the current layout hierarchy.
And we can do that by adding the '@' sign,
followed by the name of the parents
segment that we want to reset to.
So for example, if we were to change this
file from +page.svelte to +page@b.svelte,
then it will put the abc route inside
the b layout instead of the c layout.
So now these two routes share a layer,
or we could change it to a.
And so now we go from home to a,
to the b layout, back to the a layout.
Or we could reset it all the way to
the top by specifying the empty string.
And so now we go home, a, b, and
then back to the route layout.
Right, the route layout here,
this applies to every page of your app,
you cannot break out of the route layout.
So if you have some parts of your app that
shouldn't have any layout UI whatsoever,
then what you'll need to do is put
every other part of your app inside
a route group.
Something like parentheses app, and then
put all of your routes inside that, and
then you can use +page@ to reset all the
way to the blank layout at the very top.
>> In this SvelteKit docs regarding
the data SvelteKit preload code,
hover and tap have this same description,
what's their difference?
>> So the difference between hover and
tap is that if a link has
the data SvelteKit preload
data attribute set to hover,
then when the mouse comes
to rest over that link,
SvelteKit will begin fetching the code
and the data for the next page.
The assumption being that if the mouse
has come to arrest over the link,
there's a very high chance that the user
is about to initiate a navigation.
But if you don't want that,
then you can specify tap.
And in that case, the preloading won't
begin until there's a pointer down then.
That doesn't give you quite
as much of a head start,
but it does reduce the number of false
positives that you'll encounter.
So if you're trying to save data,
then that's a good thing for you to do.
But if you're trying to maximize
the speed of navigation,
then you'll want to use hover.
Obviously, hover only applies to
desktop because on a mobile device,
you don't have a mouse,
there are no hover events.
So in that case, it will fall back
to the tap behavior in all cases.
If you do have hover set, then if for
whatever reason the the hover hasn't yet
been triggered because the mouse
clicks on the link while it's still
moving over the link, then it will
also initiate navigation on tap.
>> Is the +page@.svelte
the same as +layout@.svelte?
>> Yeah, so you can apply a layout
reset to your layout components
as well as to your page components if
you want a whole group of routes to
be reset to an earlier layout separately,
altogether, I guess.
Yeah, I hope that makes sense.
>> Is there a way to have named layouts?
>> The way that you name a layout is
just by having it inside a segment.
So wherever you are in the tree,
you can refer to a layout above the route
that you're currently at just by
referring to the name of the directory
in which that layout is.
>> To be clear, a layout that you
can refer to that isn't route-based?
>> No, because if you had something like
that, then the layouts would no longer
be bound to the hierarchy and the behavior
would be very difficult to reason about.
So the name of the layout
is always connected to
the directory in which that layout lives.
If we started having two ways of naming
layouts, then it would just add confusion,
but you wouldn't actually gain any
expressive power, so we don't do that.